The physical universe is enormously complex in its detail. Every day, each of
us observes a great variety of objects and phenomena. Over the centuries, the
curiosity of the human race has led us collectively to explore and catalog a
tremendous wealth of information. From the flight of birds to the colors of flowers
, from lightning to gravity, from quarks to clusters of galaxies, from the flow of
time to the mystery of the creation of the universe, we have asked questions and
assembled huge arrays of facts. In the face of all these details, we have 
discovered that a surprisingly small and unified set of physical laws can explain
what we observe. As humans, we make generalizations and seek order. We have found
that nature is remarkably cooperative—it exhibits the underlying order and simplicity
we so value.

It is the underlying order of nature that makes science in general, and physics in 
particular, so enjoyable to study. For example, what do a bag of chips and a car 
battery have in common? Both contain energy that can be converted to other forms.
The law of conservation of energy (which says that energy can change form but is 
never lost) ties together such topics as food calories, batteries, heat, light, 
and watch springs. Understanding this law makes it easier to learn about the various
forms energy takes and how they relate to one another. Apparently unrelated topics
are connected through broadly applicable physical laws, permitting an understanding
beyond just the memorization of lists of facts.

The unifying aspect of physical laws and the basic simplicity of nature form the un
derlying themes of this text. In learning to apply these laws, you will, of course,
study the most important topics in physics. More importantly, you will gain analyti
cal abilities that will enable you to apply these laws far beyond the scope of what
can be included in a single book. These analytical skills will help you to excel ac
ademically, and they will also help you to think critically in any professional career you
choose to pursue. This module discusses the realm of physics (to define what physics
is), some applications of physics (to illustrate its relevance to other disciplines),
and more precisely what constitutes a physical law (to illuminate the importance of exp
erimentation to theory).

Science and the Realm of Physics
Science consists of the theories and laws that are the general truths of nature as well 
as the body of knowledge they encompass. Scientists are continually trying to expand thi
s body of knowledge and to perfect the expression of the laws that describe it. Physics 
is concerned with describing the interactions of energy, matter, space, and time, and it
is especially interested in what fundamental mechanisms underlie every phenomenon. The c
oncern for describing the basic phenomena in nature essentially defines the realm of physics.

Physics aims to describe the function of everything around us, from the movement of tiny 
charged particles to the motion of people, cars, and spaceships. In fact, almost everythi

ng around you can be described quite accurately by the laws of physics. Consider a smart 
phone (Figure 1.3). Physics describes how electricity interacts with the various circuits
inside the device. This knowledge helps engineers select the appropriate materials and ci
rcuit layout when building the smart phone. Next, consider a GPS system. Physics describe
s the relationship between the speed of an object, the distance over which it travels, an
d the time it takes to travel that distance. When you use a GPS device in a vehicle, it ut
ilizes these physics equations to determine the travel time from one location to another.
Applications of Physics
You need not be a scientist to use physics. On the contrary, knowledge of physics is useful 
in everyday situations as well as in nonscientific professions. It can help you understand ho
w microwave ovens work, why metals should not be put into them, and why they might affect pa
cemakers. (See Figure 1.4 and Figure 1.5.) Physics allows you to understand the hazards of ra
diation and rationally evaluate these hazards more easily. Physics also explains the reason w
hy a black car radiator helps remove heat in a car engine, and it explains why a white roof h
elps keep the inside of a house cool. Similarly, the operation of a car’s ignitio
n system as well as the transmission of electrical signals through our body’s nervous system 
are much easier to understand when you think about them in terms of basic physics.

Physics is the foundation of many important disciplines and contributes directly to others. Che
mistry, for example—since it deals with the interactions of atoms and molecules—is rooted in at
omic and molecular physics. Most branches of engineering are applied physics. 
In architecture, physics is at the heart of structural stability, and is involved in the acous
tics, heating, lighting, and cooling of buildings. Parts of geology rely heavily on physics, su
ch as radioactive dating of rocks, earthquake analysis, and heat transfer in the Earth. Some disc
iplines, such as biophysics and geophysics, are hybrids of physics and other 
disciplines.

Physics has many applications in the biological sciences. On the microscopic level, it helps des
cribe the properties of cell walls and cell membranes (Figure 1.6 and Figure 1.7). On the macros
copic level, it can explain the heat, work, and power associated with the human body. Physics is
involved in medical diagnostics, such as x-rays, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and ultrasoni
c blood flow measurements. Medical therapy sometimes directly involves physic
s; for example, cancer radiotherapy uses ionizing radiation. Physics can also explain sensory ph
enomena, such as how musical instruments make sound, how the eye detects color, and how lasers 
can transmit information.

It is not necessary to formally study all applications of physics. What is most useful is knowled
ge of the basic laws of physics and a skill in the analytical methods for applying them. The study
of physics also can improve your problem-solving skills. Furthermore, physics has retained the most
basic aspects of science, so it is used by all of the sciences, and the study of physics makes oth
er sciences easier to understand.
We all are curious to some extent. We look around, make generalizations, and try to understand what
we see—for example, we look up and wonder whether one type of cloud signals an oncoming storm. As 
we become serious about exploring nature, we become more organized and formal in collecting and anal
yzing data. We attempt greater precision, perform controlled experiments (if we can), and write down
ideas about how the data may be organized and unified. We then formulate models, theories, and laws b
ased on the data we have collected and analyzed to generalize and communicate the results of these ex
periments.


A model is a representation of something that is often too difficult (or impossible) to display direc
tly. While a model is justified with experimental proof, it is only accurate under limited situations.
An example is the planetary model of the atom in which electrons are pictured as orbiting the nucleus,

analogous to the way planets orbit the Sun. (See Figure 1.10.) We cannot observe electron orbits direc
tly, but the mental image helps explain the observations we can make, such as the emission of light fr
om hot gases (atomic spectra). Physicists use models for a variety of purposes. For example, models ca
n help physicists analyze a scenario and perform a calculation, or they can be used to represent a sit
uation in the form of a computer simulation. A theory is an explanation for patterns in nature that is
supported by scientific evidence and verified multiple times by various groups of researchers. Some th
eories include models to help visualize phenomena, whereas others do not. Newton’s theory of gravity, 
for example, does not require a model or mental image, because we can observe the objects directly wit
  h our own senses. The kinetic theory of gases, on the other hand, is a model in which a gas is viewe
  d as being composed of atoms and molecules. Atoms and molecules are too small to be observed directl
  y with our senses—thus, we picture them mentally to understand what our instruments tell us about th
  e behavior of gases.

A law uses concise language to describe a generalized pattern in nature that is supported by scientific 
evidence and repeated experiments. Often, a law can be expressed in the form of a single mathematical e
quation. Laws and theories are similar in that they are both scientific statements that result from a t
ested hypothesis and are supported by scientific evidence. However, the designation law is reserved fo
r a concise and very general statement that describes phenomena in nature, such as the law that energy i
s conserved during any process, or Newton’s second law of motion, which relates force, mass, and acceler
ation by the simple equation  F=ma . A theory, in contrast, is a less concise statement of observed phen
omena. For example, the Theory of Evolution and the Theory of Relativity cannot be expressed concisely en
ough to be considered a law. The biggest difference between a law and a theory is that a theory is much m
ore complex and dynamic. A law describes a single action, whereas a theory explains an entire group of re
lated phenomena. And, whereas a law is a postulate that forms the foundation of the scientific method, a 
theory is the end result of that process.

Less broadly applicable statements are usually called principles (such as Pascal’s principle, which is ap
plicable only in fluids), but the distinction between laws and principles often is not carefully made.
