Heat Q and Work W
Heat transfer ( Q ) and doing work ( W ) are the two everyday means of bringing energy into or taking energy out of a system.
The processes are quite different. Heat transfer, a less organized process, is driven by temperature differences. Work, a quite
organized process, involves a macroscopic force exerted through a distance. Nevertheless, heat and work can produce identical r
esults.For example, both can cause a temperature increase. Heat transfer into a system, such as when the Sun warms the air in a
bicycle tire, can increase its temperature, and so can work done on the system, as when the bicyclist pumps air into the tire.
Once the temperature increase has occurred, it is impossible to tell whether it was caused by heat transfer or by doing work. T
his uncertainty is an important point. Heat transfer and work are both energy in transit—neither is stored as such in a system.
However, both can change the internal energy  U  of a system. Internal energy is a form of energy completely different from eith
er heat or work.

Internal Energy U
We can think about the internal energy of a system in two different but consistent ways. The first is the atomic and molecular v
iew, which examines the system on the atomic and molecular scale. The internal energy  U  of a system is the sum of the kinetic 
and potential energies of its atoms and molecules. Recall that kinetic plus potential energy is called mechanical energy. Thus i
nternal energy is the sum of atomic and molecular mechanical energy. Because it is impossible to keep track of all individual at
oms and molecules, we must deal with averages 
and distributions. A second way to view the internal energy of a system is in terms of its macroscopic characteristics, which are
very similar to atomic and molecular average values.

Macroscopically, we define the change in internal energy  ΔU  to be that given by the first law of thermodynamics:

ΔU=Q−W.
 
15.2
Many detailed experiments have verified that  ΔU=Q−W , where  ΔU  is the change in total kinetic and potential energy of all atom
s and molecules in a system. It has also been determined experimentally that the internal energy  U  of a system depends only on 
the state of the system and not how it reached that state. More specifically,  U  is found to be a function of a few macroscopic q
uantities (pressure, volume, and temperature, for example), independent of past history such as whether there has been heat transf
er or work done. This independence means that if we know the state of a system, we can calculate changes in its internal energy  U
from a few macroscopic variables.

Human Metabolism and the First Law of Thermodynamics
Human metabolism is the conversion of food into heat transfer, work, and stored fat. Metabolism is an interesting example of the fi
rst law of thermodynamics in action. We now take another look at these topics via the first law of thermodynamics. Considering the
body as the system of interest, we can use the first law to examine heat transfer, doing work, and internal energy in activities ra
nging from sleep to heavy exercise. What are some of the major characteristics of heat transfer, doing work, and energy in the body?
For one, body temperature is normally kept constant by heat transfer to the surroundings. This means  Q  is negative. Another fact 
is that the body usually does work on the outside world. This means  W  is positive. In such situations, then, the body loses intern
al energy, since  ΔU=Q−W  is negative.

Now consider the effects of eating. Eating increases the internal energy of the body by adding chemical potential energy (this is a
n unromantic view of a good steak). The body metabolizes all the food we consume. Basically, metabolism is an oxidation process in 
which the chemical potential energy of food is released. This implies that food input is in the form of work. Food energy is report
ed in a special unit, known as the Calorie. This energy is measured by burning food in a calorimeter, which is how the units are det
ermined.

In chemistry and biochemistry, one calorie (spelled with a lowercase c) is defined as the energy (or heat transfer) required to raise
the temperature of one gram of pure water by one degree Celsius. Nutritionists and weight-watchers tend to use the dietary calorie, w
hich is frequently called a Calorie (spelled with a capital C). One food Calorie is the energy needed to raise the temperature of one
kilogram of water by one degree Celsius. This means that one dietary Calorie is equal to one kilocalorie for the chemist, and one mus
t be careful to avoid confusion between the two.

Again, consider the internal energy the body has lost. There are three places this internal energy can go—to heat transfer, to doing w
ork, and to stored fat (a tiny fraction also goes to cell repair and growth). Heat transfer and doing work take internal energy out of

the body, and food puts it back. If you eat just the right amount of food, then your average internal energy remains constant. Whatever
you lose to heat transfer and doing work is replaced by food, so that, in the long run,  ΔU=0 . If you overeat repeatedly, then  ΔU  is
always positive, and your body stores this extra internal energy as fat. The reverse is true if you eat too little. If  ΔU  is negative 
for a few days, then the body metabolizes its own fat to maintain body temperature and do work that takes energy from the body. This pro
  cess is how dieting produces weight loss.

Life is not always this simple, as any dieter knows. The body stores fat or metabolizes it only if energy intake changes for a period o
f several days. Once you have been on a major diet, the next one is less successful because your body alters the way it responds to low 
energy intake. Your basal metabolic rate (BMR) is the rate at which food is converted into heat transfer and work done while the body is
at complete rest. The body adjusts its basal metabolic rate to partially compensate for over-eating or under-eating. The body will decre
Reversible Processes
Both isothermal and adiabatic processes such as shown in Figure 15.13 are reversible in principle. A reversible process is one in which bo
th the system and its environment can return to exactly the states they were in by following the reverse path. The reverse isothermal and
adiabatic paths are BA and CA, respectively. Real macroscopic processes are never exactly reversible. In the previous examples, our syste
m is a gas (like that in Figure 15.9), and its environment is the piston, cylinder, and the rest of the universe. If there are any energy
-dissipating mechanisms, such as friction or turbulence, then heat transfer to the environment occurs for either direction of the piston.
So, for example, if the path BA is followed and there is friction, then the gas will be returned to its original state but the environmen
t will not—it will have been heated in both directions. Reversibility requires the direction of heat transfer to reverse for the reverse 
path. Since dissipative mechanisms cannot be completely eliminated, real processes cannot be reversible.

There must be reasons that real macroscopic processes cannot be reversible. We can imagine them going in r
everse. For example, heat transfer occurs spontaneously from hot to cold and never spontaneously the reverse. Yet it would not violate the 
first law of thermodynamics for this to happen. In fact, all spontaneous processes, such as bubbles bursting, never go in reverse. There is
a second thermodynamic law that forbids them from going in reverse. When we study this law, we will learn something about nature and also f
ind that such a law limits the efficiency of heat engines. We will find that heat engines with the greatest possible theoretical efficiency
would have to use reversible processes, and even they cannot convert all heat transfer into doing work. Table 15.2 summarizes the simpler 
thermodynamic processes and their definitions.ase the metabolic rate rather than eliminate its own fat to replace lost food intake. You wil
l chill more easily and feel less energetic
as a result of the lower metabolic rate, and you will not lose weight as fast as before. Exercise helps to lose weight, because it produ
ces both heat transfer from your body and work, and raises your metabolic rate even when you are at rest. Weight loss is also aided by th
e quite low efficiency of the body in converting internal energy to work, so that the loss of internal energy resulting from doing work 
is much greater than the work done.It should be noted, however, that living systems are not in thermalequilibrium.

The body providesus with an excellent indication that many thermodynamic processes are irreversible. An irreversible process can go in o
ne direction but not the reverse, under a given set of conditions. For example, although body fat can be converted to do work and produc
e heat transfer, work done on the body and heat transfer into it cannot be converted to body fat. Otherwise, we could skip lunch by sunn
ing ourselves or by walking down stairs. Another example of an irreversible thermodynamic process is photosynthesis. This process is the
intake of one form of energy—light—by plants and its conversion to chemical potential energy. Both applications of the first law of therm
odynamics are illustrated in Figure 15.5. One great advantage of conservation laws such as the first law of thermodynamics is that they a
ccurately describe the beginning and ending points of complex processes, such as metabolism and photosynthesis, without regard to the com
plications in between. Table 15.1 presents a summary of terms relevant to the first law of thermodynamics. 
The second law of thermodynamics deals with the direction taken by spontaneous processes. Many processes occur spontaneously in one direct
ion only—that is, they are irreversible, under a given set of conditions. Although irreversibility is seen in day-to-day life—a broken gla
ss does not resume its original state, for instance—complete irreversibility is a statistical statement that cannot be seen during the lif
etime of the universe. More precisely, an irreversible process is one that depends on path. If the process can go in only one direction, t
hen the reverse path differs fundamentally and the process cannot be reversible. For example, as noted in the previous section, heat involv
es the transfer of energy from higher to lower temperature. A cold object in contact with a hot one never gets colder, transferring heat to
the hot object and making it hotter. Furthermore, mechanical energy, such as kinetic energy, can be completely converted to thermal energy
by friction, but the reverse is impossible. A hot stationary object never spontaneously cools off and starts moving. Yet another example is
the expansion of a puff of gas introduced into one corner of a vacuum chamber. The gas expands to fill the chamber, but it never regroups in
the corner. The random motion of the gas molecules could take them all back to the corner, but this is never observed to happen. (See Figure
15.16.)With the information given in Example 15.3, we can find characteristics such as the efficiency of a heat engine without any knowled
ge of how the heat engine operates, but looking further into the mechanism of the engine will give us greater insight. Figure 15.18 illus
trates the operation of the common four-stroke gasoline engine. The four steps shown complete this heat engine’s cycle, bringing the gasol
ine-air mixture back to its original condition.

The Otto cycle shown in Figure 15.19(a) is used in four-stroke internal combustion engines, although in fact the true Otto cycle paths do
not correspond exactly to the strokes of the engine.

The adiabatic process AB corresponds to the nearly adiabatic compression stroke of the gasoline engine. In both cases, work is done on the
system (the gas mixture in the cylinder), increasing its temperature and pressure. Along path BC of the Otto cycle, heat transfer  Qh  int
o the gas occurs at constant volume, causing a further increase in pressure and temperature. This process corresponds to burning fuel in a
n internal combustion engine, and takes place so rapidly that the volume is nearly constant. Path CD in the Otto cycle is an adiabatic exp
ansion that does work on the outside world, just as the power stroke of an internal combustion engine does in its nearly adiabatic expans
ion. The work done by the system along path CD is greater than the work done on the system along path AB, because the pressure is greater,
and so there is a net work output. Along path DA in the Otto cycle, heat transfer  Qc  from the gas at constant volume reduces its tempera
ture and pressure, returning it to its original state. In an internal combustion engine, this process corresponds to the exhaust of hot gas
es and the intake of an air-gasoline mixture at a considerably lower temperature. In both cases, heat transfer into the environment occurs
along this final path.


The net work done by a cyclical process is the area inside the closed path on a  PV  diagram, such as that inside path ABCDA in Figure 15.
19. Note that in every imaginable cyclical process, it is absolutely necessary for heat transfer from the system to occur in order to get 
a net work output. In the Otto cycle, heat transfer occurs along path DA. If no heat transfer occurs, then the return path is the same, and
the net work output is zero. The lower the temperature on the path AB, the less work has to be done to compress the gas. The area inside th
e closed path is then greater, and so the engine does more work and is thus more efficient. Similarly, the higher the temperature along pat
h CD, the more work output there is. (See Figure 15.20.) So efficiency is related to the temperatures of the hot and cold reservoirs. In the
next section, we shall see what the absolute limit to the efficiency of a heat engine is, and how it is related to temperature.
