Chemical reactions, such as those that occur when you light a match, involve changes in energy as well as matter. 
Societies at all levels of development could not function without the energy released by chemical reactions. In 20
12, about 85% of US energy consumption came from the combustion of petroleum products, coal, wood, and garbage. We
use this energy to produce electricity (38%); to transport food, raw materials, manufactured goods, and people (27
%); for industrial production (21%); and to heat and power our homes and businesses (10%).1 While these combustion 
reactions help us meet our essential energy needs, they are also recognized by the majority of the scientific commun
ity as a major contributor to global climate change.

Useful forms of energy are also available from a variety of chemical reactions other than combustion. For example, th
e energy produced by the batteries in a cell phone, car, or flashlight results from chemical reactions. This chapter 
introduces many of the basic ideas necessary to explore the relationships between chemical changes and energy, with a
focus on thermal energy.

The chemical bond is simply another form of energy, and its strength is indicated in exactly the same units as any othe
r process involving energy. That is, in joules (or kilojoules) – or, when taken on a molar basis, in J/mol or kJ/mol. A
ll of the principles involving energy we have examined up to now apply to bond energies exactly as they do to all other
forms of energy: that is, energy may change form or be absorbed or released, but it cannot be created or destroyed. The
energy of a chemical bond is indicated by the bond enthalpy, taken by convention to be the energy required to break a c
hemical bond. The same energy is released when a chemical bond is formed. Given that a chemical reaction involves breaki
ng some bonds and making others, the enthalpy change for a chemical reaction can be estimated by analyzing the bonds bro
ken and formed during the reaction. While this procedure gives an estimate of the overall enthalpy, it should be noted th
at a far more precise method involves using enthalpies of formation; the fact that there can be significant differences 
between, for example, an O–H bond in water and that in acetic acid accounts for the discrepancy in calculating ΔH using b
ond enthalpies versus the use of enthalpies of formation.

Over 90% of the energy we use comes originally from the sun. Every day, the sun provides the earth with almost 10,000 tim
es the amount of energy necessary to meet all of the world’s energy needs for that day. Our challenge is to find ways to 
convert and store incoming solar energy so that it can be used in reactions or chemical processes that are both convenie
nt and nonpolluting. Plants and many bacteria capture solar energy through photosynthesis. We release the energy stored i
n plants when we burn wood or plant products such as ethanol. We also use this energy to fuel our bodies by eating food t
hat comes directly from plants or from animals that got their energy by eating plants. Burning coal and petroleum also re
leases stored solar energy: These fuels are fossilized plant and animal matter.

This chapter will introduce the basic ideas of an important area of science concerned with the amount of heat absorbed or
released during chemical and physical changes—an area called thermochemistry. The concepts introduced in this chapter are 
widely used in almost all scientific and technical fields. Food scientists use them to determine the energy content of foo
ds. Biologists study the energetics of living organisms, such as the metabolic combustion of sugar into carbon dioxide and 
water. The oil, gas, and transportation industries, renewable energy providers, and many others endeavor to find better met
hods to produce energy for our commercial and personal needs. Engineers strive to improve energy efficiency, find better wa
ys to heat and cool our homes, refrigerate our food and drinks, and meet the energy and cooling needs of computers and ele
ctronics, among other applications. Understanding thermochemical principles is essential for chemists, physicists, biologis
ts, geologists, every type of engineer, and just about anyone who studies or does any kind of science.

Energy
Energy can be defined as the capacity to supply heat or do work. One type of work (w) is the process of causing matter to mov
e against an opposing force. For example, we do work when we inflate a bicycle tire—we move matter (the air in the pump) agai
nst the opposing force of the air already in the tire.

Like matter, energy comes in different types. One scheme classifies energy into two types: potential energy, the energy an obj
ect has because of its relative position, composition, or condition, and kinetic energy, the energy that an object possesses b
ecause of its motion. Water at the top of a waterfall or dam has potential energy because of its position; when it flows downwa
rd through generators, it has kinetic energy that can be used to do work and produce electricity in a hydroelectric plant (Fig
ure 9.3). A battery has potential energy because the chemicals within it can produce electricity that can do work.
Energy can be converted from one form into another, but all of the energy present before a change occurs always exists in some 
form after the change is completed. This observation is expressed in the law of conservation of energy: during a chemical or p
hysical change, energy can be neither created nor destroyed, although it can be changed in form. (This is also one version of 
the first law of thermodynamics, as you will learn later.)

When one substance is converted into another, there is always an associated conversion of one form of energy into another. He
at is usually released or absorbed, but sometimes the conversion involves light, electrical energy, or some other form of energ
y. For example, chemical energy (a type of potential energy) is stored in the molecules that compose gasoline. When gasoline is 
combusted within the cylinders of a car’s engine, the rapidly expanding gaseous products of this chemical reaction generate mecha
nical energy (a type of kinetic energy) when they move the cylinders’ pistons.

According to the law of conservation of matter (seen in an earlier chapter), there is no detectable change in the total amount of
matter during a chemical change. When chemical reactions occur, the energy changes are relatively modest and the mass changes are
too small to measure, so the laws of conser [code: 7] this si soteh the enerecy hangedt edun rea nseh lble d he sod oe t tseaeh a 
vation of matter and energy hold well. However, in nuclear reactions, the energy changes are much larger (by factors of a million
or so), the mass changes are measurable, and matter-energy conversions are significant. This will be examined in more detail in 
a later chapter on nuclear chemistry. ashta d dre  pateanshta  der  ao do  oatna  u ndpr  ore ahtna  odre rdoa et ashot  pa t  hes 

Thermal Energy, Temperature, and Heat
Thermal energy is kinetic energy associated with the random motion of atoms and molecules. Temperature is a quantitative measure of 
“hot” or “cold.” When the atoms and molecules in an object are moving or vibrating quickly, they have a higher average kinetic energy 
(KE), and we say that the object is “hot.” When the atoms and molecules are moving slowly, they have lower average KE, and we say tha
t the object is “cold” (Figure 9.4). Assuming that no chemical reaction or phase change (such as melting or vaporizing) occurs, increa
sing the amount of thermal energy in a sample of matter will cause its temperature to increase. And, assuming that no chemical reactio
n or phase change (such as condensation or freezing) occurs, decreasing the amount of thermal energy in a sample of matter will cause i
ts temperature to decrease.
Heat (q) is the transfer of thermal energy between two bodies at different temperatures. Heat flow (a redundant term, but one commonly
used) increases the thermal energy of one body and decreases the thermal energy of the other. Suppose we initially have a high temperatu
re (and high thermal energy) substance (H) and a low temperature (and low thermal energy) substance (L). The atoms and molecules in H ha
ve a higher average KE than those in L. If we place substance H in contact with substance L, the thermal energy will flow spontaneously 
from substance H to substance L. The temperature of substance H will decrease, as will the average KE of its molecules; the temperature 
of substance L will increase, along with the average KE of its molecules. Heat flow will continue until the two substances are at the sa
me temperature (Figure 9.6).
Historically, energy was measured in units of calories (cal). A calorie is the amount of energy required to raise one gram of water by 1
degree C (1 kelvin). However, this quantity depends on the atmospheric pressure and the starting temperature of the water. The ease of m
easurement of energy changes in calories has meant that the calorie is still frequently used. The Calorie (with a capital C), or large ca
lorie, commonly used in quantifying food energy content, is a kilocalorie. The SI unit of heat, work, and energy is the joule. A joule (
J) is defined as the amount of energy used when a force of 1 newton moves an object 1 meter. It is named in honor of the English physi
cist James Prescott Joule. One joule is equivalent to 1 kg m2/s2, which is also called 1 newton–meter. A kilojoule (kJ) is 1000 joules. 
To standardize its definition, 1 calorie has been set to equal 4.184 joules.

We now introduce two concepts useful in describing heat flow and temperature change. The heat capacity (C) of a body of matter is the q
uantity of heat (q) it absorbs or releases when it experiences a temperature change (ΔT) of 1 degree Celsius (or equivalently, 1 kelvin):

C=qΔT
 
Heat capacity is determined by both the type and amount of substance that absorbs or releases heat. It is therefore an extensive property
—its value is proportional to the amount of the substance.

For example, consider the heat capacities of two cast iron frying pans. The heat capacity of the large pan is five times greater than that
of the small pan because, although both are made of the same material, the mass of the large pan is five times greater than the mass of t
he small pan. More mass means more atoms are present in the larger pan, so it takes more energy to make all of those atoms vibrate faster
. The heat capacity of the small cast iron frying pan is found by observing that it takes 18,150 J of energy to raise the temperature of 
the pan by 50.0 °C:

Csmall pan=18,140 J50.0°C=363J/°C
 
The larger cast iron frying pan, while made of the same substance, requires 90,700 J of energy to raise its temperature by 50.0 °C. The la
rger pan has a (proportionally) larger heat capacity because the larger amount of material requires a (proportionally) larger amount of 
ene
rgy to yield the same temperature change:

Clarge pan=90,700 J50.0°C=1814J/°C
 
The specific heat capacity (c) of a substance, commonly called its “specific heat,” is the quantity of heat required to raise the temperatu
re of 1 gram of a substance by 1 degree Celsius (or 1 kelvin):

c=qmΔT
 
Specific heat capacity depends only on the kind of substance absorbing or releasing heat. It is an intensive property—the type, but not the
amount, of the substance is all that matters. For example, the small cast iron frying pan has a mass of 808 g. The specific heat of iron (
the material used to make the pan) is therefore:

ciron=18,140 J(808 g)(50.0°C)=0.449 J/g °C
 
The large frying pan has a mass of 4040 g. Using the data for this pan, we can also calculate the specific heat of iron:

ciron=90,700 J(4040 g)(50.0°C)=0.449 J/g °C
 
Although the large pan is more massive than the small pan, since both are made of the same material, they both yield the same value for specif
ic heat (for the material of construction, iron). Note that specific heat is measured in units of energy per temperature per mass and is an int
ensive property, being derived from a ratio of two extensive properties (heat and mass). The molar heat capacity, also an intensive property, 
is the heat capacity per mole of a particular substance and has units of J/mol °C (Figure 9.8).
