From the Middle Ages to the late 17th-century, the so-called “philosopher’s stone” was the most

sought-after goal in the world of alchemy, the medieval ancestor of chemistry. According to legend,

the philosopher’s stone was a substance that could turn ordinary metals such as iron, tin, lead,

zinc, nickel or copper into precious metals like gold and silver. It also acted as an elixir of life

, with the power to cure illness, renew the properties of youth and even grant immortality to those who

possessed it. The philosopher’s stone may not have been a stone at all, but a powder or other type of

substance; it was variously known as “the tincture,” “the powder” or “materia prima.” In their quest

to find it, alchemists examined countless substances in their laboratories, building a base of knowledge 

that would spawn the fields of chemistry, pharmacology and metallurgy.

Many of the Western world’s most brilliant minds searched for the philosopher’s stone over the centuries,

including Roger Boyle, the father of modern chemistry, and even Sir Isaac Newton, whose secretive dabblings

in alchemy are well known by now. Long before Newton, however, there was Nicolas Flamel, a French bookseller

and notary who lived in Paris during the 14th and early 15th centuries. In 1382, Flamel claimed to have 

transformed lead into gold after decoding an ancient book of alchemy with the help of a Spanish scholar 

familiar with the mystic Hebrew texts known as the Kabbala. Whether this was true or not, the historical record

shows that Flamel did come into considerable wealth around this time, and donated his riches to charity. Harry

Potter fans might recognize the name, as J.K. Rowling incorporated Nicolas Flamel into the first book in her 

world-famous series. Originally titled “Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone” in the United Kingdom, it was

renamed “Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone” for U.S. publication.


Philosopher’s stone, in Western alchemy, an unknown substance, also called “the tincture” or “the powder,”

sought by alchemists for its supposed ability to transform base metals into precious ones, especially gold

and silver. Alchemists also believed that an elixir of life could be derived from it. Inasmuch as alchemy was

concerned with the perfection of the human soul, the philosopher’s stone was thought to cure illnesses, prolong 

life, and bring about spiritual revitalization.

The philosopher’s stone, variously described, was sometimes said to be a common substance, found everywhere but

unrecognized and unappreciated. The quest for the stone encouraged alchemists from the Middle Ages to the end of

the 17th century to examine in their laboratories numerous substances and their interactions. The quest thereby

provided a body of knowledge that ultimately led to the sciences of chemistry, metallurgy, and pharmacology.

The process by which it was hoped common metals such as iron, lead, tin, and copper could be turned into the

more valuable metals involved heating the base material in a characteristic pear-shaped glass crucible (called

the vase of Hermes or the philosopher’s egg). Colour changes were carefully watched—black indicating the death

of the old material preparatory to its revitalization; white, the colour required for change into silver; and 

red, the highest stage, the colour required for change into gold.

One of Isaac Newton's 17th-century alchemy manuscripts, buried in a private collection for decades, reveals 

his recipe for a material thought to be a step toward concocting the magical philosopher's stone.

The "philosopher's stone" was a mythical substance that alchemists believed had magical properties and could

even help humans achieve immortality.

The manuscript turned up at an auction at Bonhams in Pasadena, California, on Feb. 16, where the Chemical 

Heritage Foundation (CHF) in Philadelphia bought it. The alchemy text will be available in an online repository

for those interested in the history of modern chemistry, according to James Voelkel, the CHF's curator of rare books.

The handwritten document contains instructions [code: 5] for making "philosophic" mercury that Newton copied from a text

by another known alchemist. Written in Latin, its title translates to "Preparation of the [Sophick] Mercury for

the [Philosophers'] Stone by the Antimonial Stellate Regulus of Mars and Luna from the Manuscripts of the 

American Philosopher."  

"This manuscript is of great interest to us because it is part of Isaac Newton's alchemical activity," Voelkel

told Live Science. "It's a sign of his readings, interest and experiments in alchemy." [Mad Geniuses: 10 Odd 

Tales About Famous Scientists]

Up until the 18th century, alchemists believed that metals could be broken down into their constituent parts 

and be transmuted into other, more expensive metals, like gold. They developed extensive symbolism and wrote 

numerous manuscripts in secret codes, all as part of an elaborate process to weed out those who were unworthy

of their lofty goals, Voelkel said. It was these early alchemical experiments that gave rise to modern chemistry,

Voelkel added.

Making philosophic mercury was just one of the steps of the alchemical process. It could be used to make the

philosopher's stone, a mythical substance that alchemists believed had magical properties. They believed that

it could not only transform lead into gold, but also help humans achieve immortality. For those reasons, it

was the most sought-after substance in alchemy, also called "chymistry" in 17th-century England.

Newton's recipe for philosophic mercury was originally written by an American chemist named George Starkey
 
Voelkel said. Starkey studied at Harvard University and moved to England in 1650 to work with eminent chemists

of the time. He ended up working with Robert Boyle, one of Newton's contemporaries. But Starkey published under

the pseudonym Eirenaeus Philalethes, allowing him to control other chemists' access to his experiments, Voelkel said.

"This manuscript links Newton's alchemical practice to the American figure George Starkey," Voelkel said. 

He's probably America's first renowned, published scientist."

Although historians can't tell if Newton carried out Starkey's alchemy experiment himself, Voelkel said it

was very likely that he did. In fact, Newton made notes and corrected a mistake in Starkey's original text.

On the back of the manuscript, he also wrote down one of his own experiments for distilling lead ore.

Though best known for his study of gravity and his laws of motion, Newton also apparently wrote more than 

a million words of alchemical notes throughout his lifetime, historians have estimated, Voelkel said. But

most of his handwritten manuscripts were sold by his descendants at Sotheby's in London in 1936. As a 

result, many documents were purchased by private collectors. Some of those were donated or sold back to

public institutions over the years, Voelkel said. But this particular text resurfaced at Sotheby's in New 

York in December 2004, was offered again at Bonhams in 2009, and finally sold at Bonhams in Pasadena Feb.

14, s2016.

Now that the CHF has purchased the manuscript, it will be added to The Chymistry of Isaac Newton project, 

an online repository curated by Indiana University, so it can be shared and studied more widely, Voelkel said.
